.\" $Header$
.TH CLUSTER L "$Date: 2002-07-03 11:08:51 +1000 (Wed, 03 Jul 2002) $"
.SH NAME
cluster, pca \- Hierarchical Cluster Analysis and Principal Component Analysis
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cluster
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ vectorfile 
.RI [ namesfile ]]
.LP
.B pca
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ vectorfile
.RI [ namesfile ]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Cluster
performs Hierarchical Cluster Analysis (HCA) on a set of vectors and
outputs the result in a variety of formats on standard output.
.PP
.B Pca
performs Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on a set of vectors and
prints the transformed set of vectors on standard output.
.PP
If
.I vectorfile
is given it is read as the file containing the vector data,
one vector per line, components separated by whitespace.
An optional
.I namesfile
can be given to assign names (arbitrary strings) to these vectors.
Names must be specified one per line, matching the number of vectors in
.IR vectorfile .
Names are either contiguous non-whitespace characters or arbitrary strings
delimited by an initial double quote `"' and the end of line.
.PP
Vector names may also be given in
.I vectorfile
itself, following the vector components on each line.
If no names
are provided, vectors in the output are identified by their input sequence
number instead.
.PP
Either of these files may be given as
.RB ` - ',
indicating that the
corresponding information should be read from standard input.
If no arguments are given standard input is read,
allowing
.B cluster
to be used as a filter.
.PP
.B Cluster
and
.B pca
also provide a simple scaling facility.
If the first line of the input is terminated by the keyword
.RB ` _SCALE_ '
it is interpreted as a vector of scaling factors.
The following lines are then
read as data as usual, except that vector components are multiplied by
their corresponding scaling factors.
To specify scaling factors on the command line use
.br
	(echo
.I factor1
.I factor2
\&... _SCALE_ ; \e
.br
	cat
.I vectorfile
) | cluster - [
.I namesfile
]
.PP
Yet another potentially useful feature is that vector components may be
specified as
.RB ` D/C '
(don't care), meaning that that component will always
contribute zero in computing distances to other vectors.
In PCA mode, each D/C value is replaced by the mean of all non-D/C values
along its dimension.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -p
Force PCA mode, even when the program is called as
.BR cluster .
.RB ( cluster
and
.B pca
are different incarnations of the same program, depending on the
zeroth argument.)
.TP
.B -s
Suppress scaling.
Vector components are not scaled, even if a
.B _SCALE_
line was found.
This is useful to produce both scaled and unscaled analyses from the
same input file.
.TP
.B -v
Verbose output. Reports the number and dimension of vectors read
and precedes each output section with an explanatory message.
For
.B pca ,
execution of the computational steps involved is reported.
.SS "Cluster only"
.TP
.B -d
Output all pairs of clusters formed, along with their respective
inter-cluster distances.
Clusters are given as lists of vectors.
.TP
.B -t
Represent the hierarchical clusters as a tree lying on its side.
The leaves of the tree are formed by vector names, and the
horizontal spacing between nodes is proportional to the distances
between clusters.
The output uses only ASCII characters, resulting in a rough approximation
of the true proportions.
.TP
.B -T
Same as
.B -t
but the cluster tree is displayed in a
.BR curses (3)
pad.  The terminal screen can be scrolled around the tree representation.
Also, VT100 graphics characters are used for line drawing if available.
While displaying the tree, the following one-key commands can be used:
.RS
.PD 0
.TP 10
Home, H
Scroll to upper-left corner of window.
.TP
h, j, k, l, arrow keys
Scroll left, down, up, right by one position.
.TP
Tab, BackTab
Scroll right, left by 8 positions.
.TP
n, p
Sroll down, up by one page.
.TP
R
Redraw screen.
.TP
q
Quit the display.
.PD
.RE
.TP
.BI -w width
Set the width of the tree representation used by
.B -t
and
.B -T
to
.I width
characters.
The default width is 80 or the terminal width as determined by
.BR curses (3).
Wider trees are more difficult to view but give a more accurate picture
of relative distances.
.TP
.B -g
Same as
.BR -t ,
but the graphical output is specified in a format suitable for the
UNIX
.BR graph (1G)
utility, which allows further formatting such as bounding box,
axes labels, rotation, and scaling.
.BR Graph (1G)
in turn produces plotting instructions according to the
.BR plot (5)
format, for which a variety of output filters exist.
The following are typical command lines.
.br
.sp 1
Previewing on a standard terminal:
.br
	cluster -g | graph -g1 | plot -Tcrt
.br
Previewing under X windows:
.br
	cluster -g  | graph -g1 | xplot
.br
or
.br
	cluster -g  | xgraph
.br
If neither xplot nor xgraph are available, run an
.BR xterm (1)
switched to Tektronics mode and use
.br
	cluster -g | graph -g1 | plot -Ttek
.br
Converting to postscript:
.br
	cluster -g | graph -g1 | psplot
.br
Printing on a printer supporting
.B plot (5)
format:
.br
	cluster -g | graph -g1 | lpr -g 
.br
.TP
.B -b
Same as
.BR -g ,
except that double drawing of lines is avoided, thus saving space and time.
This requires however that
.B graph
be called with the
.B -b
option to correctly assemble the tree from pieces:
.br
	cluster -b | graph -b
.TP
.B -B
The input vectors are output as bit vectors induced by the cluster tree.
The cluster tree is interpreted as a code tree, i.e., for each left or right
branch are `0' or `1' bit, respectively, is printed.
An `x' is used to pad vectors to the depth of the tree.
.TP
.BI -n p
Norm to be used as distance metric between vectors.
A positive integer
.I p
specifies a metric based on the L\c
.IR p -norm.
The value
.B 0
selects the maximum norm.
The default is
.B 2
(Euclidean distance).
.PP
For compatibility with an earlier version of the program, the default
behavior of
.B cluster
corresponds to the combination of options
.BR -dtv .
.SS "Pca only"
.TP
.BI -e eigenbase
Use
.I eigenbase
as a file with precomputed eigenvectors.
If the file exists, it is read and the relatively costly eigenvalue
computation is avoided.
This also allows transforming a data set according to principle components
determined from a different data set.
If the file does not exist, an eigenbase is computed from the current
input and saved in the file.
.TP
.BI -c pc1,pc2,...
Select a subset of the principal components for output, as typically
used for dimensionality reduction of vector sets.
Components of the transformed vectors are listed in the order
specified by the comma-separated list of numbers
.IR pc1 , pc2 ,...
For example,
.B "-c4,2"
prints the fourth and second principal components (in that order).
.TP
.B -E
Output the eigenvalues instead of the transformed input vectors.
Eigenvalues are printed in descending order or as specified by the
.B -c
option.
This option forces recomputation of the eigenbase even if an existing
file is specified with the
.B -e
option.
.SH BUGS
Halfhearted error handling.
If vectors and names are given in the same
file, the name at the end of the first line must be a non-numerical string,
or it will be mistaken as a vector component.
.PP
The vector names at the leaves of the cluster tree tend to
stretch beyond the bounding box of the plot.
This is a feature since 
.B cluster
leaves the graphing process entirely to
.BR graph (1G),
which doesn't care about the length of strings.
This can be corrected by explicitly specifying an upper limit for the x
coordinate.
.PP
The clustering algorithm could be optimized further.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
graph(1G), plot(5), plot(1G), xplot(1), xgraph(1), xterm(1),
psplot(1), curses(3), lpr(1).
.SH AUTHORS
Original version by Yoshiro Miyata (miyata@boulder.colorado.edu).
.br
Minor fixes, various options,
.BR curses (3)
support,
.BR graph (1G)
output and PCA addition by Andreas Stolcke (stolcke@icsi.berkeley.edu).
.br
Scaling and algorithm improvements suggested by Steve Omohundro
(om@icsi.berkeley.edu).
.br
Don't care values suggested by Kim Daugherty (kimd@gizmo.usc.edu).
.br
Bit vector output suggested by Joseph Devlin (jdevlin@maestro.usc.edu).
.br
The algorithms for eigenvalue computation and Gaussian elimination
were adapted from
.I "Numerical Recipes in C" 
by Press, Flannery, Teukolsky & Vetterling.
.br
Finally, this program is freely distributable, but nobody should try to make
money off of it, and it would be nice if researchers using it 
acknowledged the people mentioned above.
